---
author:
- Johannes Elferich
- UMass Chan Medical School/HHMI
opening: Dear Editor,
closing: Sincerely,
date: 29 May 2022

return-address: 
- RNA Therapeutics Institute
- 368 Plantation St
- Worcester MA 01605

fontfamily: mathpazo
fontsize: 12pt
geometry: margin=1in
blockquote: true

signature-before: -8ex
signature-after: 0ex
closing-indentation: 0pt
links-as-notes: true
colorlinks: true
...

Please find enclosed our manuscript titled “Defocus Corrected Large Area Cryo-EM (DeCo- LACE) for Label-Free Detection of Molecules across Entire Cell Sections”.

In our manuscript, we describe a new data collection approach, DeCo-LACE, that allows for high-throughput acquisition of cryo-EM data from large-area samples, such as cell lamellae generated by focused-ion beam milling. Advances in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) have made it possible to detect biomolecular complexes inside vitrified sections of cells solely by their atomic structure. Therefore, cryo-EM could be used as one way to quantitatively describe a cell’s state by identifying the number, location, and orientation of the biomolecules within it. This concept is often referred to as “visual proteomics”. However, there are still many challenges that need to be solved before this vision can become reality. One of these challenges is that the field of view at the magnifications required to capture atomic detail is much smaller than a typical eukaryotic cell, limiting throughput and potentially missing important biological context.

DeCo-LACE allows imaging of whole lamellae at atomic detail and, most importantly, results in seamless montages of an entire cell section. The data therefore capture the full biological context. We show that this data is of sufficient quality to detect ribosomes in the cell slices using 2D template matching (2DTM). The results provide a 3D map of ribosomes within these cell slices, and from their orientations and locations, this indicates their docking to membranes or translation of a common mRNA. We believe that this technological advance will result in new discoveries that could not be obtained by any other method. For example, in the proof-of-principle imaging of mammalian neutrophil-like cells, we found an unexpected population of granules containing vesicles. Our 2DTM analysis demonstrates that some of these vesicles contain ribosomes, which could hint towards a new class of extracellular vesicles containing translating units.

We hope that you will find this new technique interesting and suitable as an article for the Tools and Resources section of eLife. 