## Introduction

Understanding of cellular processes requires knowledge of the amounts, location,
interactions, and conformations of biomolecules inside the cell. Techniques that
measure this can broadly be divided into label- and label-free techniques. In
label-techniques a probe is physically attached to a molecule of interest that
is able to produce a high signal-to-noise signal, such as a fluorescent molecule.
In label-free techniques the physical properties of molecules themselves are
used for detection. An example for this is proteomics using mass-spectrometry
[@doi:10.1038/nbt.1592]. The advantage of label-free techniques is that
they can provide information over thousands of molecules, while label-techniques
offer higher fidelity information for a few molecules. Especially spatial
information can most of the time only be achieved using label-techniques, such
as fluorescence microscopy [@doi:10.1038/nmeth817]. 

Cryo-electron microscopy has the potential to directly measure the arrangement
of atoms that compose biomolecules inside of cells, thereby allowing label-free
detection with high spatial accuracy. This has been called "visual proteomics"
[@doi:10.1038/nrm1861]. Since cryo-EM requires thin samples (<500nm), imaging of
biomolecules inside cells is either restricted to small organisms, thin
regions of large cells, or requires thinning of the sample. This can be achieved
either by mechanical sectioning [@doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.1983.tb04225.x] or by
milling using a focused ion beam (FIB) [@doi:10.1016/j.sbi.2013.08.006]. This
complex workflow restricts throughput of cryo-EM imaging of cells. This is
exacerbated by the fact that at the required magnifications, typical field of
views (FOV) are very small compared to mammalian cells and the FOV achieved by
label-techniques such as fluorescence light microscopy. The predominant cryo-EM
technique for detection of biomolecules according to their shape in cells at the
moment is cryo-electron tomography [@doi:10.1017/S0033583511000102]. However,
the requirement of physically tilt the stage at every FOV, together with a more
complex workflow that requires highly accurate alignment of various projection,
further restricts the throughput for molecular detection. 

An alternative approach is to identify molecules  by their structural
"fingerprint" in single projection using "2D template-matching"
[@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648; @doi:10.1101/2020.04.22.053868;
@doi:10.7554/eLife.68946]. In this method an experimentally obtained 3D model
of a biomolecule is used to calculate the expected electron density, which is
called the template. The template is then projected on a fine angular grid and
the projections are used to find local cross-correlation peaks in a cryo-EM
micrograph. Since locations of the biomolecule in the Z-direction causes
predictable aberrations to the projection image, this method can be used to
calculate 3D coordinates and orientations of a biomolecule in a cellular sample
[@doi:10.1101/2020.04.22.053868]

Hematopoiesis is the process of generating the various cell types of the blood in
the bone marrow. Disregulation of the process results in diseases like leukemia.
Understanding how hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are programmed to
diffferentiate to the appropriate cell type would be provide new insight how
hematopoiesis can be misregulated. Of special interest is the regulation of
translation during hematopoiesis. This is exemplified by the observation that
genetic defects in the ribosome machinery often leads to hematopoietic
disease[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkz637]. As such direct quantification of ribosome
location, number and conformational states could lead to new insight into
hematopoietic disease [@doi:10.1186/s12885-018-4178-z]. 

Here we apply 2D-template matching of ribosomes to cryo-FIB milled
neutrophil-like murine cells [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.057]. To increase the
amount of collected data and to provide un-biased sampling of the whole lamella
we devised a new data-acquisition scheme, Defocus-corrected large area
cryo-electron microscopy (DeCo-LACE). We characterize aberration cause by the
used large beam-image shifts and highly focused beams and find that they can be
adequately correct to enable ribosome detection by 2D-template matching. The
resulting data provides a description of ribosome distribution in the whole
lamellae, which represent roughly 2% of the cellular volume. We find highly
heterogeneous density of ribosome within the cell and can identify discrete
clusters of presumably translationaly active ribosomes, by testing for the
presence of the small ribosomal subunit. The high accuracy of location and
orientation of each detected ribosome also allows us to cluster ribosome
molecules into potential polysomes. Analysis of the throughput in this method
suggests that for the foreseeable future computation will be the bottleneck for
visual proteomics.