## Introduction

Understanding of cellular processes requires knowledge of the amount, location,
and interaction of biomolecules inside the cell. Techniques that measure this
can broadly be divided into label, and label-free techniques. In
label-techniques a probe is physically attahced to a molecule is interest that
is able to produce a high signal-to-noise signal, such as a fluorescent probe.
In label-free techniques the physical properties of molecules themselves are
used for detection. An example for this is proteomics using mass-spectrometry.
Broadly the advantage of label-free techniques is that they can provide
information over thousands of molecules, while label-techniques offer higher
fidelity information for a few molecules. Especially spatial information can
most of the time only be achieved using label-tehcniques. 

Cryo-electron microscopy has the potential to directly measure the arrangement
of atoms that compose biomolecules inside of cells, thereby allowing label-free
detection with high spatial accuracy. This has been called "Visual proteomics".
The predominant technique at the moment is cryo-electron tomography. However,
the throughput of these methods in low due to highly complex sample preparation,
data acquisition, and data processing. We have shown that molecules can be
identified by their structural "fingerprint" in single projection using "2D
template-matching".

Hematopoiesis is the process of generating the various cell typs of the blood in
the bone marrow. Disregulation of the process results in diseases like leukemia.
Understaning how hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are programmed to
diffferentiate to the appropriate cell type would be provide new insight how
hematopoiesis can be misregulated. Of special interest is the regulation of
translation during hematopoiesis. This is exemplified by the observation that
genetic defects in the ribosome machinery often leads to hematopoietic disease.
As such direct quantification of ribosome location, number and conformational
states could lead to new insight into hematopoietic disease. 

Here we apply 2D-template matching to neutrophil-ilke murine cells. By employing
anew data-acquisition scheme we obtained coverage of the whole "lamella"
covering roughly 2% of the cellular volume. 