## Materials and Methods

### Grid preparation

ER-HoxA9 cells were maintained in RPMI medium supplemented with 10% FBS,
penicillin/streptomycin, SCF, and estrogen [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.08.057] at
37 °C and 5% CO2. 120 h prior to grid preparation, cells were washed twice in PBS
and cultured in the same medium except without estrogen. Differentiation was
verified by staining with Hoechst-dye and inspection of nuclear morphology.
Cells were then counted and diluted to $1\cdot10^6$ cells/ml. Grids (either 200
mesh copper grids, with a sillicone-oxide and 2 µm holes with a 2 µm spacing or
200 mesh gold grids with a thin gold film and 2 µm holes in 2 µm spacing) were
glow-discharged from both sides using a 15 mA for 45 s. 3.5 µl of cell suspension
was added to grids on the thin-film side and grids were blotted from the back
side using a GP2 cryoplunger (Leica) for 8 s and rapidly plunged into liquid
ethane at -185 °C. 

### FIB-milling

Grids were loaded into an Aquilos 2 FIB/SEM (Thermo Fisher) instrument with a
stage cooled to -190 °C. Grids were sputter-coated with platinum for 15 s at 45 mA
and then coated with a layer of platinum-precursor by opening the GIS-valve for
45 s. An overview of the grid was created by montaging SEM images and isolated
cells at the center of gridsquares were selected for FIB-milling. Lamellae were
generated automatically using the AutoTEM software (Thermo Fisher), with the
following parameters:

- Milling angle: 20°
- Rough milling: 3.2 µm thickness, 0.5 nA current
- Medium milling: 1.8 µm thickness, 0.3 nA current, 1.0° overtilt
- Fine milling: 1.0 µm tchickness, 0.1 nA current, 0.5° overtilt
- Finer milling: 700 nm thickness, 0.1 nA curent, 0.2° overtilt
- Polish 1: 450 nm thickness, 50 pA current
- Polish 2: 200 nm thickness, 30 pA current

This resulted in 6-10 µm wide lamella with 150-250 nm thickness as determined by
FIB-imaging of the lamella edges.

### Data collection

Grids were loaded into a Titan Krios TEM (Thermo Fisher) operated at 300 keV and
equipped with a BioQuantum energy filter (Gatan) and K3 camera (Gatan). The
microscope was aligned using a cross-grating grid on the stage. Prior to each
session, we carefully performed the "Image/Beam" calibration in nanoprobe. We
set the magnification to a pixel size of 1.76 Å and condensed the beam to ~ 900 nm
diameter, resulting in the beam being completely visible on the camera. To
establish fringe-free conditions, the "Fine eucentric" procedure of SerialEM [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2005.07.007] was
used to move a square of the cross-grating grid to the eucentric position of the
microscope. The effective defocus was then set to 2 µm, using the "autofocus"
routine of SerialEM. The objective focus of the microscope was changed until no
fringes were visible. The stage was then moved in Z until images had an apparent
defocus of 2 µm. The difference in stage Z-position between the eucentric and
fringe-free conditions was used to move other areas into fringe-free condition.

Low magnification montages were used to find lamellae and lamellae that were
sufficiently thin and free of contamination were selected for automated data
collection. Overview images of each lamella were taken at 2250x magnification
(38 Å pixel size). The corners of the lamella in the overview image were manually
annotated in SerialEM and translated into beam image-shift values using SerialEM's
calibration. A hexagonal pattern of beam image-shift positions was calculated
that covered the area between the four corners in a serpentine way, with a
$\sqrt{3}\cdot425$ nm horizontal spacing and $3/4\cdot 850$ nm vertical spacing. Exposures were
 taken at each position with a 30 e^-^/Å$^2$ total dose. After each exposure, the
defocus was estimated using the ctffind function of SerialEM and the focus for
the next exposure was corrected by the difference between the estimated focus
and the desired defocus of 800 nm. Furthermore, after each exposure the
deviation of the beam from the center of the camera was measured and corrected
using the "CenterBeamFromImage" command of SerialEM.

After data collection, a 20 s exposure at 2250x magnification of the lamella at
200 μm defocus was taken for visualization purposes. A Python script implementing
this procedure is available at [Link to repo].

### DeCo-LACE data processing

An overview of the data analysis pipeline is shown in Fig.
{@fig:deco_lace_workflow}. 

#### Pre-processing 
Motion-correction, dose weighting and other preprocessing as detailed below was performed using *cis*TEM [@doi:10.7554/eLife.35383]. To avoid influence of the beam-edge on motion-correction, only a quarter of the
movie in the center of the camera was considered for calculation of the
estimated motion. After movie frames were aligned and summed, a mask for the
illuminated area was calculated by lowpass filtering the image with a 100 Å
resolution cutoff, thresholding the image at 10% of the maximal value and then lowpass
filtering the mask again with a 100 Å resolution cutoff to smooth the mask edges. This mask was
then used to select dark areas in the image and fill the pixels with
Gaussian noise, with the same mean and standard deviation as the illuminated
area. A custom version of the unblur program [@doi:10.7554/eLife.06980]
implementing this procedure is available at [link to decolace branch]. During motion correction images were resampled to a pixel size of 1.5 Å. The
contrast-transfer function (CTF) was estimated using ctffind
[@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2015.08.008], searching between 0.2 and 2 μm defocus. 

#### 2DTM

The search template was generated from the atomic model of the mouse LSU
(PDB 6SWA, exluding the Epb1 subunit) using the cryo-EM simulator implemented in *cis*TEM
[@doi:10.1107/S2052252521008538]. The
match_template program [@doi:10.7554/eLife.68946] was used to search for this
template in the movie-aligned, exposure-filtered and masked images, using a 1.5°
angular step in out-of-plane angles and a 1.0° angular step in-plane. 11 defocus
planes in 20 nm steps centered around the ctffind-determined defocus were searched. Targets
were defined as detected when their matches with the template produced peaks
with a singal-to-noise ratio (SNR) above a threshold of 7.75, which was chosen
based on the one-false-positive-per-tile criterion [@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648].

#### Montage assembly

The coordinates of each tile $i$,
$\mathbf{c}_{i}$ [2D Vector in pixels] were initialized using beam image-shift of the tile, $\mathbf{b}_i$ [2D Vector in μm],
and the ISToCamera matrix $\mathbf{IC}$, as calibrated by SerialEM: 

$$\mathbf{c}_{i} = \mathbf{IC} \cdot \mathbf{b}_i$$

A list of tile pairs $i,j$ that overlap were assembled by selecting images where
$|\mathbf{c}_i-\mathbf{c}_j| < D_{Beam}$. In order to calculate the precise offset between tiles $i$ and $j$, $\mathbf{r}_{i,j}$, we calculated the cross-correlation between the two tiles, masked to the overlapping illuminated area using the scikit-image
package [@doi:10.7717/peerj.453] was used to calculate refined offsets . The coordinates $\mathbf{c}_{i}$ were then refined by a least-square minimization against $\mathbf{r}_{i,j}$:

$$ \displaystyle{\min_{\mathbf{c}} \sum_{pairs}{(\mathbf{r}_{i,j} - (\mathbf{c}_i-\mathbf{c}_j))^2}}$$

using the scipy package [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2]. The masked cross-correlation and the least-square minimization was repeated once more to arrive at the final tile alignment. 

The x,y coordinates of target $n$ detected by 2DTM in the tile $i$,
$\textbf{m}^\textrm{T}_{n,i}$, was transformed into the montage frame by adding
the coordinate of the tile.

$$ \textbf{m}^\textrm{M}_n = \textbf{m}^\textrm{T}_{n,i} + \textbf{c}_i$$

The z coordinate of each target was calculated as the sum of the defocus offset
for the target, the estimated defocus of the tile, and the nominal defocus of
the microscope when the tile was acquired. 

Images were rendered using UCSF ChimeraX [@doi:10.1002/pro.3943]. The Python scripts used for data processing are available
under [repolink].

