## Results

### 2DTM detects large ribosomal subunits in cryo-FIB lamella of mammalian cells

To test whether we could detect individual ribosomes in mammalian cells we
prepared cryo-lamella of mouse neutrophil-like cells. Low-magnification images
of these lamellas clearly shows cellular features consistent with a
neutrophil-like phenotype, mainly a segmented nucleus and a plethora of
membrane-organelles, corresponding to the granules and secretory vesicles of
neutrophils (Fig. {@fig:initmatching}A). We then proceeded to acquire
micrographs on this lamella with a defocus of 0.5-1.0 um, 30 e/Å2/s exposure and
1.5 Å pixelsize. We manually selected multiple locations in the lamella and
focused using standard low-dose techniques where  focusing is performed on a
sacrificial area. The resulting micrographs showed no signs of crystalline ice
and had Thon-rings to  resolution, indicating successful vitrification. 

We used an atomic model of the 60S mouse ribosomal subunit  (6SWA) for 2D
template matching. In a subset of images the distribution of cross-correlation
scores significantly exceeded the distribution expected from non-signifcant
matching. In the resulting scaled maximum-intensity maps, clear peaks with SNR
thresholds up to 10 were apparent (Fig. {@fig:initmatching2}A). By using the
criterion described by for thresholding potential matches we found that in
images of cytosolic compartments we found evidence of 10-500 ribosomes in the
imaged areas. Notably we found no matches in images that were taken in the
nuclear compartment. In the cytosolic areas we found a drastically different
number of matches, In some areas we found only ~ 50 matches er image area, while
 in another area we found more than 500 matches . This ten-fold difference in
local ribosome concentration , but we realized that current data acquistion
protocols are limited in that only a small area of the lamella is actually
imaged and, due to the manual selection of acquision positions based on the
overview image, might be biased towards cellular region that appear appealing to
the experimentalist. We therefore set out to collect cryo-EM data for 2DTM from
mammalian lamella in a high-throughput unbiased fashion.

### DECO-LACE for 2D imaging of whole lamella

In order to obtain high-resolution data for complete lamella we used a new
approach for data collection. This approach uses three key strategies: (1)
ensures that every electron that exposes the sample is collected on the camera
(2) uses beam-image shift to precisely and quickly raster the surface of the
lamella and (3) uses a focusing strategy that does not rely on a sacrificial
area.

To ensure that every electron exposing the sample was captured by the detector,
we focused the electron beam so that the entire beam was placed on the detector.
During canonical low-dose imaging the microscope is configured so that the focal
plan is identical to the eucentric plane of the specimen stage. This leaves the
C2 aperture out of focus, resulting in ripples at the edge of the beam (Figure
2B). While these ripples are low-resolution features that might not interfere
with 2D template matching, which is designed to be robust to low-resolution
noise, we also tested collecting data under a condition where the C2 aperture is
in focus (Figure 2C). 

We then centered a lamella under the electron beam and used beam-image shift of
the microscope to systematically raster the whole surface of the lamella in a
hexagonal pattern. Instead of focusing in a sacrificial area, we determined the
defocus after every exposure using a routine implemented in SerialEM modeled
after CTFFind. The focus was then adjusted based on the difference between
desired and measured defocus. Since we used a serpentine pattern for data
collection every exposure is close to the previous exposure making drastic
changes in the defocus unlikely. Furthermore we started our acquisition pattern
on the platinum deposition edge, so the initial exposure where the defocus was
not yet adjusted did not contain any biologically relevant information. 

We used this strategy to collect data on 8 lamella, 4 using the eucentric focus
condition and 4 using the fringe-free condition. We were able to highly
consistently collect data with a defocus of 8 um (Figure 2D), both in the
eucentric focus and fringe-free focus condition. Together with the nominal
defocus of the microscope this data results in a topological map of the lamella.
To ensure that data was collected consistently, we mapped defocus values as a
function of the applied Beam-image shift (Figure 2E). This demonstrated that the
defocus was consistent over the lamella, with outliers only at isolated images
and in images containing contamination. We also plotted the measure objective
astigmatism of the lamella and found that it varies with the applied Beam-image
shift, become more astigmatic mostly due to beam-image shift in the X direction.
While approaches exist to correct this during the data-collection, we opted to
not use these mechanism for these early experiments and instead rely on
computational correction of these aberrations in order to characterize them. 

### 2DTM of DeCo-LACE data reveals ribosome distribution in cellular cross-sections

In initial attempts of using 2DTM on micrographs acquired with the DeCo-LACE
protocol, we did not observe any SNR peaks above threshold using the large
subunit of the mouse ribosome (Fig. {@fig:crop_unblur}A). We reasoned that the
edges of the beam might interfere with motion-correction of the movie as they
would remain stationary or move differently than the sample. Indeed when we
cropped movie to exclude the beam edges we found that the estimated motion was
larger than estimated on the uncropped movie (Fig. {@fig:crop_unblur}B).
Furthermore, in the motion-corrected average we could identify SNR peaks above
detection threshold (Fig. {@fig:crop_unblur}B), indicating that 2DTM is very
sensitive to accurate motion correction and that the beam edge did interfere
with motion-correction. In order to avoid having to crop the movies we
implemented a function in unblur to consider only the cropped area for
estimation of shifts, but average the complete movie (Fig. {@fig:crop_unblur}B).
Using this approach we motion-corrected all tiles in the 8 lamella and found
consistently total motion below 1Å per frame (Fig.
{@fig:lamella_motion_thickness} A). In some lamella we found increased motion in
the center of the lamella, which indicates that mechanical stability of
FIB-milled lamella might not be homogeneous over the lamella surface. In some
micrographs we also observed that the beam edges gave rise to artifacts in the
cross-correlation mip and numerous false-positive matches at the edge of the
illuminated area (Fig. TODO). A similar phenomenon was observed on isolated
"hot" pixels in the unilluminated area. To overcome this issue we implemented a
function in unblur to replace unillluminated areas in the micrograph with
gaussian noise, with mean and standard deviation matched to the illuminated
portion of the micrograph (Fig. TODO). Together, these special pre-processing
steps enabled us to perform 2DTM on all tiles of the 8 lamellae.

We then used the refined tile positions to calculate the positions of the
matched LSUs in the lamellae (Fig. {@fig:matching_euc} A, Fig.
{@fig:matching_fff} A). Overlaying these positions of the lamella montages
reveal ribsome distribution throughout the FIB-milled slice of individual cells.
Organelles like the nucleus and mitochondria only showed sporadic matches with
low SNRs, consistent with the estimated false-positive rate on one per tile.
During the assembly we calculated the Z positions from the indivdual estimated
defocus levels and the focus plane of the microscope during acquisition of each
tile. When viewed from the side the ribosome position therefore show the slope
of the lamella in the microscope frame (Fig. {@fig:matching_euc} B, Fig.
{@fig:matching_fff} B). Furthermore, the side-views indicated that lamellae were
thinner at the leading edge. Indeed, when we plotted the electron intensities in
individual tiles as a function of Beam-Image shift we observed substantially
higher intensities at the leading edge, which in energy-filtered TEM indicates a
thinner sample [cite]. Even though we prepared the lamellae with the "overtile"
approach [cite], this means that ribosome densities across the lamellae can be
schewed by the changes in thickness and better sample preparation methods are
needed to generate more even samples. 

Close inspection of the ribosome positions in the lamellae revealed multi
interesting features. Ribosomes could be seen associating with the membrane, in
patterns reminiscent of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (Fig.
{@fig:matching_euc} C, Fig. {@fig:matching_fff} C) or the outer nuclear membrane
(Fig. {@fig:matching_euc} D). We also observed ribosomes forming ring-like
structures (Fig. {@fig:matching_euc} E), potentially indicating circularized
mRNAs [cite]. While ribosomes were for the most part excluded from the numerous
granules observed in the cytoplasm, in some circumstances we observed clusters
of ribosomes in the lower electron density inclusion in the class of
double-membraned granules described earlier (Fig. {@fig:matching_euc} F, Fig.
{@fig:matching_fff} D,E). It is, in principle, possible that these matches are
situated above or below the imaged granule, since the granules position in Z
cannot be determined using a 2D projection. However, in the case of Fig.
{@fig:matching_fff} E, the matched ribosomes span the whole lamella  in the Z
direction, while a position above or below the granule would result in ribosome
situated exlusively at the top or bottom of the lamella. This conclusive
evidence of ribosomes in the inclusion is consistent with the earlier hypothesis
that the inclusion is of cytoplasmic origin.

Between the 8 lamellae we found different number of matches (Fig.
{@fig:matching_stats} A). Lamella 1 of the lamellae collected at eucentric focus
has by far the most matches, but also had the largest surface area and contained
cytoplasm of two cells. Lamella 4 of the lamellae collected at eucentric focus
had the fewest matches, but this particular slice was dominated by a circular
nucleus slice, with only small pockets of cytoplasm (Fig.
{@fig:lamella_images}). In an attempt to normalize for these differences in
lamella surface area we compared the number of matches per tile in tiles which
contained more than one match, which should exclude tiles with non-cytosolic
content (Fig. {@fig:matching_stats} B). While this measure had less variablity,
there were still differences. Lamella Eucentric_4 had not only the fewest
matches, but also the lowest density, which could be due to the thickness of the
lamella or due to a slice through low-ribosome content region. Lamella
Fringe-Free 3 had substantially higher number of ribosomes per tile. Since all
of these lamella were milled into identical cells under identical conditions,
this underscores the necessity to collect data on large numbers of lamella in
order to overcome inherent variability. When comparing the distribution of
scores between the lamella we found them to be fairly comparable with a median
of .... Lamella Eucentric 1 had slightly lower scores compared to others,
potentially due to the large size and connected mechanical instabillity during
imaging. Overall we did not observe a  difference in number or SNR of matches between eucentric or fringe-free focus illumination that was bigger that inter-lamella variability. 

Since the SNR values of 2DTM are highly sensitive to image quality we reasoned we could use them to verify that DeCo-LACE does not introduce systematic errors. We first wondered whether the unusually condensed beam would be prone to non-parallel illumination or whether at the outside of the beam unknown aberration would distort the image. We reasoned that this would lead to lower SNR values at the inside edge of the illuminated area. When we plotted SNR values in all 8 lamellae as a function of there location in tiles we found high SNR value up to the edge of the illuminated area for both eucentric and fringe-free focus illumination, again demonstrating that both illumination schemed are suitable for DeCo-LACE.

We also wondered whether high Beam-Image shift values would lead aberration due to the astigmatism or beam tilt [cite]. [TODO plot scores vs BIS, euc vs fff]
### Computation is the bottleneck of visual proteomics

As described above the variability of lamella, both in terms of technique such as area, thickness and mechanical stability, and of biology, such as selection of cell and location of the slice in relation to the complete cell, could be overcome by collecting orders of magnitude more data. This will be essential to allow robust statistical comparisons of macromolecule number and location between different experimental conditions. 

