## Results

### 2DTM detects large ribosomal subunits in cryo-FIB lamellae of mammalian cells

FIB-milled *Saccharomyces cerevisiae* (yeast) cells are sufficiently well preserved to permit localization of 60S ribosomal subunits with 2DTM [@doi:10.1101/2022.04.10.487797]. Due to the larger size of mammalian cells compared to yeast cells, it was  unclear whether plunge freezing would be adequate to produce vitreous ice across the whole volume of the cell. To test this we prepared cryo-lamellae of mouse neutrophil cells. A low magnification image
of a representative lamella clearly shows cellular features consistent with a
neutrophile-like phenotype, mainly a segmented nucleus and a plethora of
membrane-organelles, corresponding to the granules and secretory vesicles of
neutrophils (Fig. [@fig:initmatching]A). We then proceeded to acquire
micrographs on this lamella with a defocus of 0.5-1.0 μm, 30 e^-^/Å$^2$/s
exposure and 1.76 Å pixel size. We manually selected multiple locations in the
lamella and acquired micrographs using standard low-dose techniques where
focusing is performed on a sacrificial area. The resulting micrographs showed
smooth bilayered membranes and no signs of crystalline ice (Fig.
[@fig:initmatching]C,D), indicating successful vitrification throughout the
lamella.  

We used an atomic model of the 60S mouse ribosomal subunit (6SWA) for 2DTM [@doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2020.11.037]. In a
subset of images, the distribution of cross-correlation scores significantly
exceeded the distribution expected from images devoid of detectable targets. In the
resulting scaled maximum-intensity projections (MIPs), clear peaks with SNR
values up to 10 were apparent (Fig. [@fig:initmatching2]A). Using a
threshold criterion to select significant targets (see Methods), we found that in
images of cytosolic compartments there were 10-500 ribosomes within one micrograph
(Fig. [@fig:initmatching]B-E). Notably, we found no targets in areas
corresponding to the nucleus (Fig. [@fig:initmatching]B) or mitochondria
(Fig. [1](#fig:initmatching)D). In the cytoplasm, we found a highly variable
number of targets, only \~ 50 in some exposures (Fig. [@fig:initmatching]E) and
up to 500 in others (Fig. [@fig:initmatching]C). However, it is unclear whether this ten-fold difference in local ribosome concentration is due to technical variation, such as sample thickness, or biological variation. To differentiate between the two we reasoned it was important to not manually choose imaging regions and to collect larger amounts of data. We therefore set out to collect cryo-EM data for 2DTM from mammalian cell lamellae in a high-throughput unbiased fashion.

### DeCo-LACE for 2D imaging of whole lamellae

In order to obtain high-resolution data from complete lamellae, we developed a new
approach for data collection. This approach uses three key strategies: (1) every
electron that exposes a fresh area of the sample is collected on the camera (2)
image shift is used to precisely and quickly raster the surface of a lamella and
(3) focusing is done without using a sacrificial area (Fig. [@fig:approach]A).

To ensure that every electron exposing a fresh area of the sample is captured by
the detector, we adjusted the electron beam size to be entirely contained by the
detector area. During canonical low-dose imaging, the microscope is configured so
that the focal plane is identical to the eucentric plane of the specimen stage.
This leaves the C2 aperture out of focus, resulting in ripples at the edge of
the beam (Fig. [@fig:approach]D). While these ripples are low-resolution
features that likely do not interfere with 2DTM [@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648], we also tested data
collection under conditions where the C2 aperture is in focus ("fringe-free",
Fig. [@fig:approach]E) [@doi:10.1017/S1431927619005798].

We then centered a lamella on the optical axis of the microscope and used the
image shift controls of the microscope to systematically scan the whole surface
of the lamella in a hexagonal pattern (Fig. [@fig:approach]A,C). Instead of
focusing on a sacrificial area, we determined the defocus from every exposure
after it was taken. The defocus was then adjusted based on the difference
between desired and measured defocus (Fig. [@fig:approach]B). Since we used a
serpentine pattern for data collection, every exposure was close to the previous
exposure, making large changes in the defocus unlikely. Furthermore, we started
our acquisition pattern on the platinum deposition edge to make sure that the
initial exposure where the defocus was not yet adjusted did not contain any
biologically relevant information.

We used this strategy to collect data on eight lamellae, four using the
eucentric focus condition, hereafter referred to as Lamella~EUC~, and four using
the fringe-free condition, hereafter referred to as Lamella~FFF~(Fig.
[@fig:assembly] A+D, Fig.
[@fig:lamella_images]A). We were able to collect data with a highly
consistent defocus of 800 nm (Fig. [@fig:approach]F), both in the eucentric
focus and fringe-free focus condition. To ensure that data were collected
consistently, we mapped defocus values as a function of the applied image shift
(Fig. [@fig:lamella_spatial_info]A). This demonstrated that the defocus was
consistent across a lamella, except for rare outliers and in images containing
contamination. We also plotted the measured objective astigmatism of each
lamella and found that it varies with the applied image shift, becoming more
astigmatic mostly due to image shift in the x direction (Fig.
[@fig:lamella_spatial_info]B). While approaches exist to correct for this
during the data collection [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2019.09.013], we opted to not use these approaches in our
initial experiments. We reasoned that because 2DTM depends on high-resolution
information, this would be an excellent test of how much these aberration affect
imaging.

We assembled the tile micrographs into a montage using the image-shift values
and the SerialEM calibration followed by cross-correlation based refinement (see
Methods). In the resulting montages, the same cellular features visible in the
overview images are apparent (Fig. [@fig:assembly]B+E, Fig. [@fig:lamella_images]B), however
due to the high magnification and low defocus many more details, such as the
membrane bilayer separation, can be observed (Fig. [@fig:assembly]C+F). For montages collected using the
eucentric condition, there are clearly visible fringes at the edges between the
tiles (Fig. [@fig:assembly]C), which are absent in the fringe-free focus montages (Fig. [@fig:assembly]F). In our analysis
below, we show that these fringes do not impede target detection by 2DTM, making
them primarily an aesthetic issue. We also note that the tiling
pattern is visible in the montages (Fig. [@fig:assembly]B+E), which we believe is due to the non-linear
behavior of the K3 camera since we can observe these shading artifacts in micrographs of a condensed beam over vacuum (Fig. [@fig:gain]).

The montages show membrane vesicles and granules with highly variable sizes and
density. We found that a substantial number of granules, which are characterized by higher
density inside the the surrounding cytosol [@doi:10.1084/jem.134.4.907], seemed to contain a membrane-enclosed inclusion with density similar to
the surrounding cytosol (Fig. [@fig:lamella_images]C) and could therefore be formed
by inward budding of the granule membrane. These granules were
150-300 nm in diameter and the inclusions were 100-200 nm in diameter. Based on
these dimensions the granules are either azurophil or specific granules [@doi:10.1084/jem.134.4.907]. To our
knowledge, these inclusion have not been described in granulocytes and are
further described and discussed below.

### 2DTM of DeCo-LACE data reveals large ribosomal subunit distribution in cellular cross-sections

In our initial attempts of using 2DTM on micrographs acquired with the DeCo-LACE
protocol, we did not observe any SNR peaks above threshold using the large
subunit of the mouse ribosome (Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]A). We reasoned that
the edges of the beam might interfere with motion-correction of the movies as
they represent strong low-resolution features that do not move with the sample.
When we cropped the movie frames to exclude the beam edges, the estimated amount
of motion increased (Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]B), consistent with successful
tracking of sample motion. Furthermore, in the motion-corrected average we could
identify significant SNR peaks (Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]B), confirming the
high sensitivity of 2DTM to the presence of high-resolution signal preserved in
the images by the motion correction. To streamline data processing, we
implemented a function in unblur to consider only a defined central area of a
movie for estimation of sample motion, while still averaging the complete movie
frames (Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]C). Using this approach, we motion-corrected
all tiles in the eight lamellae and found consistently total motion below 1 Å
per frame (Fig. [@fig:lamella_motion_thickness] A). In some lamellae we
found increased motion in the lamella center, which indicates areas of variable
mechanical stability within FIB-milled lamellae. In some micrographs we also
observed that the beam edges gave rise to artifacts in the MIP and numerous
false-positive detections at the edge of the illuminated area (Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]D). A
similar phenomenon was observed on isolated "hot" pixels in unilluminated areas.
To overcome this issue we implemented a function in unblur to replace
dark areas in the micrograph with Gaussian noise (see Methods), with
mean and standard deviation matching the illuminated portion of the micrograph
(Fig. [@fig:crop_unblur]D+E). Together, these pre-processing steps enabled us to perform 2DTM on
all tiles of the eight lamellae.

We used the tile positions to calculate the positions of the detected
LSUs in the lamellae (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]A, Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]A, Movie 1, Movie 2). Overlaying these positions of the lamellae montages reveals LSU
distribution throughout the FIB-milled slices of individual cells. Consistent with prior observations imaging selected views in yeast [@doi:10.1101/2022.04.10.487797], organelles
like the nucleus and mitochondria only showed sporadic targets detected with low
SNRs, consistent with the estimated false-positive rate of one per tile. For
each detected target we also calculated the Z positions from the individual
estimated defocus and defocus offset for each tile. When viewed from the side,
the ribosome positions therefore show the slight tilts of the lamellae relative
to the microscope frame of reference (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]B, Fig.
[@fig:matching_fff]B, Movie 1, Movie 2). Furthermore, the side views indicated that lamellae
were thinner at the leading edge. Indeed, when plotting the transmitted beam
intensities in individual tiles as a function of beam image-shift, we observed
substantially higher intensities at the leading edge (Fig. [@fig:lamella_motion_thickness]B), which in energy-filtered
TEM indicates a thinner sample [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2018.06.007]. Even though we prepared the lamellae
with the "overtilt" approach [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2016.07.010], this means that LSU densities across
the lamellae can be skewed by a change in thickness, and better sample
preparation methods are needed to generate more even samples.

As described in [@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648] the 2DTM SNR threshold for detecting a target is chosen to result in one false positive detection per image searched. We would therefore expect to find one false positive detection per tile. We reasoned that the large nuclear area imaged by DeCo-LACE could be used to test whether this assumption is true. In the 670 tiles containing exclusively nucleus (as manually annotated from the overview image) we detected 247 targets, making the false-positive rate more than twofold lower than expected. Since earlier work shows that 2DTM with the LSU can produce matches to nuclear ribosome biogenesis intermediates [@doi:10.1101/2022.04.10.487797], this could even be an overestimate of the false-positive rate. This suggests that the detection threshold could be even lower, which is an area of ongoing research.

Close inspection of the LSU positions in the lamellae revealed several
interesting features. LSUs could be seen associating with membranes, in
patterns reminiscent of the rough endoplasmic reticulum (Fig.
[@fig:matching_euc]C, Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]C) or the outer nuclear
membrane (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]D). We also observed LSUs forming
ring-like structures (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]E), potentially indicating
circularized mRNAs [@pmid:9702200]. While ribosomes were for the most part excluded
from the numerous granules observed in the cytoplasm, in some cases we observed
clusters of LSUs in the inclusions of double-membraned granules
described earlier (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]F, Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]D,E). It is, in principle, possible that these targets are situated above or
below the imaged granules, since the granule positions in z cannot be determined
using 2D projections. However, in the case of Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]E, the
detected LSUs span the whole lamella in the z direction (Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]F), while positions
above or below a granule would result in LSUs situated exlusively at the
top or bottom of the lamella. This is consistent with the earlier hypothesis that the inclusions are of
cytoplasmic origin.

### Does DeCo-LACE induce aberrations that affect 2DTM?

Within the eight lamellae we found different numbers of detected targets, ranging from 1089 to 6433 per lamella (Fig.
[@fig:matching_stat]A). Lamella~EUC~ 1 had the most detected targets, but also has
the largest surface area and contained cytoplasm from two cells. Lamella~FFF~ 4
had the fewest detected targets, but this particular lamella was dominated by a
circular section of the nucleus, with only small pockets of cytoplasm (Fig.
[@fig:lamella_images]). In an attempt to normalize for these differences in
area containing cytoplasm, we compared the number of detected targets per tile in
tiles that contained more than one target, which should exclude tiles with
non-cytosolic content (Fig. [@fig:matching_stat]B). While this measure had
less variability, there were still differences. Lamella~EUC~ 4 had not only the
fewest targets, but also the lowest density, which could be due to this lamella being the 
thinnest, or due to it sectioning the cell in an area with a lower concentration of
ribosomes. Lamella~FFF~ 3 had a substantially higher number of ribosomes per
tile. Since all of these lamellae were made from a cell-line under identical
conditions, this underscores the necessity to collect data from large numbers of
lamellae to overcome the inherent variability. When comparing the distribution of
scores between lamellae, we found them to be fairly comparable with median
SNRs ranging from 8.7 to 9.7 (Fig. [@fig:matching_stat]C). Lamella~EUC~ 1 had slightly lower scores compared
to
the rest, potentially due to its large size and connected mechanical instability
during imaging. Overall, we did not observe differences in the number or SNR of
detected targets between eucentric or fringe-free illumination conditions that
were bigger than the observed inter-lamella variability.

Since the SNR values of 2DTM are highly sensitive to image quality, we reasoned
we could use them to verify that DeCo-LACE does not introduce a systematic loss
of image quality. We considered non-parallel illumination introduced by the
unusually condensed beam and uncharacterized aberrations near the beam
periphery. When plotting the SNR values of detected targets in all eight
lamellae as a function of their location in the tiles, we found uniformly high
SNR values throughout the illuminated areas for both eucentric and fringe-free
focus illumination, demonstrating that both illumination schemes are suitable
for DeCo-LACE (Fig. [@fig:matching_stat]D).

We also wondered whether large image shifts would lead to aberrations due to
astigmatism or beam tilt [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2019.09.013]. We reasoned that if
that was the case the number of detected targets should be highest in the center of the
lamella where the applied beam image-shift is 0. Instead, we observed that in
both eucentric and fringe-free focus conditions more targets were detected at the
"back" edge of the lamella (Fig. [@fig:matching_stat]E]). This may be due to the center of the cell being predominantly
occupied by the nucleus, despite its segmentation in neutrophil-like cells. The
increase in matches at the "back" of the lamellae compared to the "front" can also
be explained by the thickness gradient of the lamellae (Fig. [@fig:lamella_motion_thickness]B,
Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]B, Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]B). In addition, aberrations would be expected to cause average 2DTM SNRs to be higher when beam-image shift
values are small. Instead, we found that SNRs where on average the highest at the
"front" edge of the lamellae, presumably due to the thinner sample. We therefore
conclude that factors other that beam image-shift or beam
condensation aberrations are limiting 2DTM SNRS, predominantly the thickness of
the lamellae.

### Computation is the bottleneck of visual proteomics

All lamellae described above were derived from a clonal cell line under identical condition and thinned with the same parameters. This means that the substantial variability of detected targets between the lamellae must be due to 
technical variability, including area, thickness, mechanical stability, and location of the section within the cell. We therefore predict that further studies that want to draw quantitative and statistically relevant conclusions about the number and location of
molecules under different experimental conditions, will require collection of orders of magnitude more data than in this study to gain enough statistical power given this variability. The samples used were
prepared in two 24 h sessions on a FIB/SEM instrument, and imaging was performed
during another two 24h session on the TEM microscope. Inspections of the
timestamps of the raw data files revealed that the milling time per lamella was
\~30 minutes and TEM imaging was accomplished in \~10 seconds per tile or 90
minutes for a \~ 6x6 μm lamella. Processing of the data, however, took
substantially longer. Specifically, 2DTM of all tiles took approximately one
week per lamella on 32 Nvidia A6000 GPUs. Computation is therefore a bottleneck in our
current workflow, and further optimizations of the algorithm may be necessary
increase throughput. Alternatively, this bottleneck could be reduced by
increasing the number of processing units.
