## Discussion

In this study we developed an approach to image entire cellular cross-section using cryo-EM at high enough resolution to allow for 2DTM detection of the LSU. The two main advantages compared to previous approaches are high throughput of imaging and biological context for detected molecules. The requirement to increase throughput in cryo-EM data collection of cellular samples has been recognized in the recent literature. Most approaches described so far are tailored towards tomography. Peck et al. [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2022.107860] and Yang et al. [@doi:10.1101/2021.12.31.474669] developed approaches to increase the FOV of tomogram data-collection by using a montaging technique. Peck et al. used a similar "condensed-beam" approach as described here. However, the montages are substantially smaller in scope, covering carbon film holes of 2 µm diameter. Bouvette et al. [@doi:10.1038/s41467-021-22251-8] and Eisenstein et al. [@doi:10.1101/2022.04.07.487557] are using beam image-shift to collect tilt-series in multiple locations in parallel to increase throughput. However, none of these approaches provide the full coverage of a cellular cross-section that can be achieved using DeCo-LACE.

We observed granules containing a vesicle of putative cytosolic origin. We speculate that upon degranulation, the process in which granules fuse with the plasma membrane, these vesicles would be released into the extracelullar space. The main types of extracellular vesicles of this size are exosomes, up to 100 nm large vesicles derived from fusion of multivesicular bodies with the plasma membrane, and microvesicles, which are derived from direct budding of the plasma membrane [@doi:10.1038/nrm.2017.125]. We suggest that granulocytes could release a third type of extracellular vesicle, granule-derived vesicles (GDV), into the extracellular space. 2DTM showed that a subset of GDVs can contain ribosomes (Fig. [@fig:matching_euc]F, Fig. [@fig:matching_fff]D,E). This could indicate that these vesicles are transporting translation-capable mRNAs, as has been described for exosomes [@doi:10.1038/ncb1596]. Further studies will be necessary to confirm the existence of GDVs in granulocytes isolated from mammals and to understand their functional significance.

As mentioned in the results, we found a consistent shading artifact pattern in our montages, that we believe is the result of non-linear behavior of the K3 camera. Indeed, when we average images with a condensed beam taken over vacuum we found in both focus conditions a consistent background pattern with a brighter region on the periphery of the illuminated area (Fig [@fig:gain]). This might be caused by dynamic adjustment of the internal camera counting threshold which expects columns of the sensor to be evenly illuminated as is the case for SPA applications. Since the signal of this pattern has mainly low-resolution components it is unlikely to affect 2DTM. However, it highlights that the non-linear behavior of the camera has to be taken into account when imaging samples with strongly varying density and unusual illumination schemes. 

We found that even though we used beam image-shift extensively (up to 7 um), we did not see substantially reduced 2DTM SNR values in tiles acquired at high beam image-shift compared to tiles acquired with low or no beam image-shift. This is unexpected because beam image-shift is though to degrade the high-resolution signal due to the introduction of beam-tilt, as has been observed in single particle analysis [@doi:10.1107/S2052252520013482; @doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2018.07.015]. 2DTM is sensitive to resolution up to the Nyquist frequency, but in practice is limited by the B-factor applied to the template [@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648]. In our case, the structure of the mouse LSU had a median B-factor of ~ 80 Å$^2$, which we multiplied by 1.5 before generating the density map. This value was chosen emiprically early in the study to optimize the number of detections. The resulting median B-factor of 120 Å$^2$ is equivalent to a lowpass filter of 7.7 Å. We did not measure the beam-tilt caused by beam-image shift on the microscope to acquire our data, but Cheng et. al. report that in their measurements Krios Titan columns exhibited a beam-tilt of 0.17-0.25 mrad per μm of beam image-shift [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2018.07.015]. We therefore expect a worst-case beam-tilt of 1.75 mrad. At this beam-tilt one would expect a phase error of larger than π/4 at resolutions higher than 5.75 Å [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2018.07.015], which is well above the resolution of our 2DTM template. We conclude that the beam-tilt caused by beam-image shift did not affect detections in the present study, but it might be important to consider when imaging at even higher beam-image shift values or when using higher resolution templates in 2DTM.

We used 2DTM of the ribosome LSU to verify the image
quality of DeCo-LACE data. However, 2DTM has the potential to detect many other
protein complexes. The model of the ribosomal LSU used in this manuscript has a
molecular weight of ~2 MDa, ~1.3 MDA of which is nucleic acid. The higher
scattering density of nucleic acid compared to protein
[@pmid:10986461] might mean that a biomolecular complex of
equal size consisting of only protein would result in lower SNR values. Many biological complexes are smaller and do not contain nucleic acid, but simulations of 2DTM [@doi:10.7554/eLife.25648] suggest that it should be possible to detect protein molecules as small as 300 kDa in an crowded environment, but is unclear whether this is achievable in practice. Besides the molecular weight we expect that the conformational homogeneity of a protein complex will affect the ability to detect it and note that for complexes that occur at low concentrations inside the cell a higher detection threshold might be nescessary to decrease the false positive rate.

Since we observed substantial variation in LSU density within and between
lamellae, visual proteomics studies that use cryo-EM to establish changes in
molecular organization within cells will require orders of magnitude more data
than used in this study. One milestone would be to image enough data to
represent one cellular volume, which for a small eukaryotic cells requires
imaging approximately 100 lamellae. While data collection throughput on the TEM
is fundamentally limited by the exposure time, this amount of data could be
collected within 12 hours by improving the data acquisition scheme to perform
all necessary calculations in parallel with actual exposure of the camera.
Sample preparation using a FIB/SEM is also currently a bottleneck, but
preparation of large lamellae with multiple cellular cross-sections using
methods like WAFFLE [@doi:10.1038/s41467-022-29501-3] might allow sufficient
throughput. As stated in the results, at least for 2DTM computation will remain
challenging and approximately 17,000 GPU hours would be required for a 100
lamellae dataset. It might be possible to increase the performance of 2DTM by
improving the implementation of GPU-based fast fourier transforms.
Alternatively, strategies that initially search images at lower resolution and
sparser rotational sampling, followed by refinement at higher resolution, could
be more efficient, but it is yet unclear whether this is feasible in cellular
samples with a lot of low-resolution background. 






